Real Time Data Acquisition in
Wireless Sensor Networks
Mujdat Soyturk1, Halil Cicibas2 and Omer Unal2
1Istanbul Technical University
2Turkish Naval Academy
Turkey
1. Introduction
Implementation of low cost sensor nodes in recent years allow sensor nodes to be applicable
in many different areas e.g. environment monitoring, homeland security and disaster relief
operations. One major contribution is their high demand on data acquisition. Real-time
data acquisition is more challenging and promising issue in these application areas. There
are many approaches and solutions proposed for real-time data acquisition in the literature.
In this chapter, we focus on real-time data acquisition in wireless sensor networks.
Wireless Sensor Networks (WSNs) consist of many tiny wireless sensors which operate in an
environment in order to collect data for a specific mission. In most type of WSNs, once
sensor nodes are deployed, thereafter no additional actions are employed. In a typical WSN,
data is gathered from the environment by sensor nodes, aggregated in intermediate nodes
and then transmitted to a base station. Because all these operations are executed by sensor
nodes with limited power in a wireless media; reliable communication, power efficiency and
network survivability issues are among critical concerns. WSNs are different from
traditional networks because of their inherent characteristics. The specific properties of these
networks pose various challenges such as energy consumption, limited bandwidth, and low
storage. In the following sections we will introduce these constraints in detail.
WSNs can be used in a wide range of application areas. Networks e.g. composed of video and
audio sensors can be used to provide monitoring and surveillance systems or can be used to
enhance the existing ones. Some critical areas for homeland security, such as borders, gulfs,
strait entrances and port approach waters, are subject to enemy infiltration in crisis and in
wartime. Using an instantly deployable network composed of sensor nodes in these operation
areas would be a good solution to increase the probability of detecting a penetration in a cost
effective and efficient way than the conventional ones. Some applications, e.g. military
operations, introduce additional requirements on sensor and ad-hoc networks such as
reliability and operating in real-time. Limited battery life of the nodes requires efficient energy
consumption techniques which challenge real-time and reliability requirements.
There are many routing approaches to provide either or both of the objectives of reducing the
end-to-end delay and providing the reliability. However, most of these routing approaches
challenge with other aspects such as energy-efficiency, long-lifetime and low-cost expect of the
system. Energy aware protocols in the literature generally use multi-hop paths to use energy
more efficiently. However, increase in number of hops between the source and the destination
www.intechopen.com
Data Acquisition
64
nodes bears some issues that must be considered (Monaco et al, 2006) (Du et al, 2006). First of
all, nodes close to the sink deplete their energies quickly; leaving the sink unreachable and
forcing the system into off-state (Yuan et al, 2007). Secondly, increase in the hop-number cause
more nodes to buffer the packet on-the-route, causing a processing overhead and delay at inbetween
nodes. Processing overhead and buffer fill-up may cause packets to be dropped. On
the other hand, delay at nodes may prevent to fulfill the real-time requirements of the system
(Monaco et al, 2006). As the network size grows, the length of the constructed paths will
increase, causing the problem described above more challenging. New routing techniques
which provide reliability and real-time response to sensor readings in energy efficient way are
always required in Wireless Sensor and Ad Hoc Networks.
Mobility is the other major concern that hardens the problem. Mobility of nodes degrades the
performance of the system, making the problem more challenging and impractical. Mobility
introduces additional overhead, increases complexity and makes the conventional routing
algorithms fail. Therefore, novel and special algorithms are required for mobile environments.
In this study we introduce and discuss some proposed MAC protocols, routing protocols
and aggregation techniques which address real-time needs in literature. Then we present
two applications for real-time data acquisition using WSN. The structure of this chapter is
as follows. In Section 2, we define real time data acquisition and relevant constraints. Real
time communication issues are also discussed in this section. MAC layer and network layer
protocols are presented in Section 3 and Section 4, respectively. In Section 5, aggregation
techniques are stated. We give two sample Real-Time WSN applications in Section 6.
2. Real-time data acquisition
Real-time data acquisition can be stated as collecting, processing and transmitting data in
predetermined latency boundaries. It mainly includes sampling, MAC layer operations,
network layer routing, data aggregation and some additional processes.
Real-time data acquisition is a mandatory issue which must be considered in some WSN
applications. This application may be a surveillance system, a temperature detector (He et
al, 2006)(Lu et al, 2005), fire monitoring or intruder tracking system. Thus, the sensor data
will be valid only within limited time duration (Felemban et al, 2005).
Real-time QoS is classified into two categories: hard real-time and soft real-time. In hard
real-time, end-to-end delay boundaries are described as deterministic values. Latency in a
message's delivery higher than this value will be a failure. However in soft real-time, a
probabilistic latency value is used and some delay delay is tolerable (Li et al, 2007). The
delay metric in every process stage determines the latency issues in algorithms and
approaches. So in order to design a real-time WSN system, each process stage should be
well designed.
2.1 Real time data acquisition constraints in WSN
In [Akyildiz et al, 2002], constraints in WSN are classified as sensor node constraints and
networking constraints. These constraints also affect the real time data acquisition. In the
Section 2.2, we present relations between real time data acquisition and these constraints.
2.1.1 Sensor node constraints
These constraints are mostly hardware related. The capabilities and constraints of a sensor
node's hardware affect the latency. These constraints are listed as follows:
www.intechopen.com
Real Time Data Acquisition in Wireless Sensor Networks
65
Limited Memory and Storage Space: The data size is important in guaranteeing real time data
acquisition because sensor nodes are small devices and they have limited storage spaces,
memories and processors. For example, there must be sufficient memory space and
processor in order to aggregate data. If this process is executed by non-sufficient memory
nodes, this may increase delay.
Energy Limitation: Energy is consumed during both computation and communication
processes within a node. Energy limitation is one major constraint that affects the
capabilities of sensor nodes extremely. Optimal solutions must be determined in order to
transmit real-time data while consuming low communication power. Energy consumption
in aggregation process is another critical issue.
Environmental Limitations: Sensor nodes have to struggle with many environmental
difficulties such as physical obstacles, node terminations, unpredictable errors that avoid
functioning of nodes, or communication interferences
2.1.2 Networking constraints
In addition to hardware-related constraints, real-time data acquisition in WSNs is affected
by network-related constraints.
Communication Constraints: In order to provide a real time communication scheme between
nodes, some preventive actions have to be taken. The relevant subjects of communication
constraints are: [Akyildiz et al, 2002].
• Unreliable communication
• Bandwidth limitation
• Frequent routing changes
• Channel error rate
Additional Limitations: Most WSNs are deployed for specific reasons or objectives. This
emerges new constraints specific to the applied area.
• Node mobility
• Intermittent connectivity
• Isolated subgroups
• Population density
In order to guarantee real time requirements all these constraints must be considered.
2.2 Real-time communications in WSNs
In this section we define the communication issues in MAC protocols, routing protocols and
data aggregation process. We try to emphasize how these affect real time communication.
High utilization of bandwidth, reducing collisions, low latency, dynamic and fast operation
of medium access control mechanism, fairness along with ensuring energy efficiency are
among major concerns for a WSN’s performance. A MAC algorithm must also achieve
fairness, where every node should be allowed to transmit its data by considering efficiency
and urgency.
A MAC protocol may adopt a distributed or a centralized approach. A distributed MAC
protocol, where each sensor node determines its cycle behavior, is simple and easy-toimplement.
This approach, however, is susceptible to collisions that reduce bandwidth
utilizations and efficiency. The other type of MAC protocol, that is the centralized one,
provides easy medium access management, simple synchronization, and low packet losses
due to the frequency differences. However, such a protocol has some drawbacks; relatively
www.intechopen.com
Data Acquisition
66
short lifetime of cluster-head nodes, registration requirements, and additional energy
consumption of mobile nodes when registering to a new cluster-head. MAC layer collisions
increase end-to-end latency, jitter, and time-outs. Retransmitted packets cause overheads
and underutilize the limited bandwidth. In Section 3 we define more issues, related with
MAC layer protocols.
The performance of a MAC algorithm affects the network layer routing algorithm. While
MAC layer decides which node will use the medium to transmit, network layer decides the
next node to transmit. Routing decision directly affects end-to-end latency, congestion and
bandwidth utilization. A routing protocol includes discovery of neighborhood, selection of
next forwarding node, traffic load balancing and congestion handling processes. For a realtime
system, all the issues mentioned must be provided with minimum jitter in a given time
limitation. We detail network layer routing protocols in Section 5.
Another key concern in WSN communication is data aggregation, in which sensed data is
combined into a single message and then, transmitted to a base station (Heinzelman et al.,
2000) by sensors. The goal of data aggregation is to reduce the communication load which
directly affects the efficiency of MAC protocol and network layer routing in a WSN. Such an
operation must be organized in a systematic way because data aggregation increases latency
and energy consumption. In adaptation of an aggregation technique, causative latency and
energy consumption should be considered.
3. Medium access in WSNs
Wireless communications use a shared medium. This means that in a signal range, in one
period of time, only one instance can send data. It is the MAC protocol’s duty to transmit
frames over this medium. Because of the limitations of power and network lifetime, the
medium access process is harder due to the low-duty cycles of the nodes within a WSN.
Designing a good MAC protocol requires taking several parameters into consideration.
Energy efficiency, scalability, adaptability, reliability, throughput, utilization of bandwidth,
and latency are among these. We focus on, first, energy consumption issue, and then, low
latency data delivery issue which is required for real-time applications. We present the
energy wastage reasons in MAC protocols, and then discuss the proposed MAC protocols
from the real-time communication view, and lastly present a comparison table of the
protocols.
3.1 Reasons of energy waste
The most energy wastage sources in MAC protocols for WSNs are (Demirkol et al, 2006)
defined as follows. The first one is collisions, when a node receives more two or more
packets simultaneously. The retransmission of the collided packets increases the energy
consumption. The second one is idle-listening. This occurs when a node listens an idle
channel to receive traffic. The third one is overhearing, that means a sensor node receives
packets that are destined for other nodes. The fourth one is control packet overheads. These
packets are required to control the access to the channel. The fifth one is over-emitting. This
occurs when a message is transmitted to a destination node which is not ready to receive.
Additionally, transition between cycles of sleep, idle, receive and transmit also increases
energy consumption. All these factors must be paid attention for designing an energy
efficient protocol.
www.intechopen.com
Real Time Data Acquisition in Wireless Sensor Networks
67
Another issue for reducing the energy consumption is that MAC protocols have a policy for
duty cycles and switching off the radio. Basic protocols use a fixed duty cycle, and some
others implement adaptive duty cycle, in which they adapt to changes in traffic over time and
place (Langendoen, 2007).
3.2 IEEE 802.11
It is the standard for WLANs. It provides low latency and high throughput, but due to idle
listening, its energy consumption is high. Therefore this protocol cannot be used for WSNs
(Ye at al, 2001).
3.3 Real time MAC approaches
In WSNs, bandwidth utilization, channel access delay and energy consumption parameters
are mainly determined by the MAC protocol. Considering a layered protocol stack, routing
in the network layer determines the end-to-end or multi-hop delay, as the MAC layer settles
single-hop or channel access delay. There are also cross-layer approaches developed in the
literature for an optimized communication (Li et al, 2007) as discussed in Section 3.4.
I-EDF: (Caccamo et al., 2002) Implicit Prioritized Access Protocol (I-EDF) guarantees a HRT
delay, using cellular backbone network. It offers collision-free communication via its mixed
TDMA and FDMA scheme. It assures high throughput even in high loads.
Dual-Mode MAC Protocol: (Watteyne et al., 2006) supports HRT which adapts a linear
network with identical nodes. In order to achieve a collision-free communication, it uses
TDMA for global synchronization and a mixed FDMA-TMA scheme is adopted. Energyefficiency
is also aimed in this protocol.
DMAC: (Lu et al., 2004) was proposed for unidirectional data gathering trees. It balances the
nodes’ active/sleep cycles due to their depths on tree, thus eliminates the sleep delay, and
incessant traffic forwarding is achieved. It is shown that DMAC is both energy efficient and
low-delay bounded.
SIFT: (Jamieson et al., 2003) SIFT is designed for event-driven applications. To select a slot
within the slotted contention window, a probability distribution function is used. It is
efficient in terms of latency when many nodes want to send packets, however related energy
consumption is a trade-off. Also, it introduces idle-listening and overhearing.
DSMAC: (Lin et al, 2004) Dynamic Sensor MAC has dynamic duty cycle property in
addition to S-MAC (Ye et al.,2004). Decreasing the latency is the primary goal. Nodes have a
SYNC period where sleep cycles are shortened when needed. It has better latency than SMAC.
DB-MAC: (Bacco et al., 2004) It is a contention-based protocol aimed for reducing the delay
in hierarchically structured applications. It employs a prioritized access mechanism and
therefore reduces energy consumption and delay.
Z-MAC: (Rhee et al., 2005) It applies dynamic shift between SDMA and TDMA. It is
topology-aware and performs well when there is high contention.
PEDAMACS: (Ergen & Varaiya, 2006) It has high powered access points which can be
reached by one hop. They gather topology information and apply a scheduling algorithm.
Bounded delay as well as energy efficiency is guaranteed.
A comparison of the afore mentioned MAC protocols is given in Table 1 to identify their
QoS support and major differences.
www.intechopen.com
Data Acquisition
68
Protocol
Name
MAC Type
Latency/
RT Type
Energy
Efficiency
Centralized/
Distributed
Scalability
*S-MAC CSMA/CA best effort high Distributed good
*T-MAC CSMA/CA best effort high Distributed good
*B-MAC CSMA/CA best effort high Distributed good
I-EDF FDMA-TDMA HRT NA Centralized moderate
Dual Mode
MAC
FDMA-TDMA HRT NA Centralized moderate
D-MAC contention-based Best effort Moderate Distributed good
DBMAC contention-based Best effort High Distributed good
Z-MAC CSMA-TDMA Best effort High Hybrid moderate
PEDEMACS TDMA HRT High Centralized low
IEEE 802.15.4
Slotted
CSMA/CA, GTS
Best effort /
HRT
Moderate Distributed good
SIFT CSMA/CA
Very low
latency
Low Distributed
DSMAC CSMA Low latency High Distributed good
Table 1. A comparison of MAC Protocols. “*” notated ones are non-real-time protocols.
3.4 Cross-layer solutions
There are some designs in the literature that aim to achieve real time parameters in a cross
layer approach. This enables a higher layer to communicate with lower distant layers.
RAP: (Lu et al., 2002) Discussed in section 4.2.
MERLIN: (Ruzzelli et al., 2006) This protocol aims both low latency and energy efficiency,
that combines MAC and routing protocols and applies a hybrid CSMA TDMA scheme. A
schedule table is used to relay packets, in which the network is seperated into time regions
with respect to hop numbers to the sink node.
VigilNet: (He et al., 2006) It is developed for real time target detection and tracking in a
large area. It adapts multi path diffusion tree. Energy consumption is aimed as well. This
application is detailed in section 6.1.
In summary, the parameters of a layer in the communication stack are reported to the next
layer up. Coordination among lower and upper layers is made possible. There are two
methods for a cross-layer design. The first one is to enhance the effectiveness of the protocol
based on the parameters in other layers. The second one is to unite the related protocols in a
single part. While this may allow a closer communication with all protocols, the connection
is hard to distinguish. Also, the merged component's functionality can be very complicated.
So it is preferable to allow transparency between the layers (Li et al, 2007).
www.intechopen.com
Real Time Data Acquisition in Wireless Sensor Networks
69
4. Real time routing protocols in WSNs
Though the MAC layer can deliver packets considering real time needs, its effect remains
local. Real-time requirements for end-to-end connections (or communication) should be
satisfied. Routing protocols are those that should have ability to satisfy end-to-end real-time
requirements (He et al., 2003). They are provided as either deterministic or probabilistic
delay guarantee (Li et al., 2007).
4.1 Real time routing protocols design issues
End-to-end delay is mainly affected by the applied routing scheme. Therefore, some design
issues must be considered in the design of routing protocols. These issues are well
summarized in (Akyýldýz et al., 2002) and (Al-Karaki & Kamal, 2004) as follows:
Energy consumption: Sensor node lifetime shows a strong dependence on the battery lifetime
(Heinzelman et al., 2000). Each sensor in a WSN can act as a relay unit, hence energy
consumption become as an important issue. If energy consumption is not managed
properly, some node’s batteries may exhaust. These malfunctioning nodes can cause
topological changes and might require rerouting of packets and reorganization of the
network (Al-Karaki & Kamal, 2004). It is to note that reorganization and rerouting processes
increase the end-to-end-delay.
Data Reporting Model: This issue affects the delivering latency of a data packet. The data
delivering method can be categorized as either time-driven, event-driven, query-driven, and
hybrid (Al-Karaki & Kamal, 2004). Event-driven and time-driven (with low period)
approaches can be considered in real time routing protocols.
Fault Tolerance: Some sensor nodes may fail because of internal or external reasons such as
power exhaustion or environmental factors. In addition to MAC layer, the routing protocols
have to find new forwarding choices in order to relay the data timely or in a low latency
bound (Al-Karaki & Kamal, 2004). So while designing a real time routing protocol fault
tolerance techniques must be determined.
Scalability: With the increase of the network size, the management would become more
complicated. A real time routing protocol should be scalable enough to respond to events in
the environment timely (Al-Karaki & Kamal, 2004). In order to relay a delay-constraint data
time-synchronization techniques may be while coordinating a huge network.
Network Dynamics: It is to note that a network is a dynamic form which can adjust
themselves according to environmental factors and needs. For example the location of nodes
or the amount of data can change in time. These changes may cause some delay while
transmitting a data. The real time routing protocol must consider such as network
dynamics.
Transmission Media: This part is discussed in Section 3.
Quality of Service: In addition to bounded latency some routing protocols have to concern
other QoS metrics such as accuracy or long network lifetime. Hence real time routing
protocols are required to capture these requirements.
These issues are not the only ones which can be used to distinguish the routing protocols.
But they are the mandatory ones. While designing a routing protocol which addresses real
time or latency, these issues must be concerned in all steps.
www.intechopen.com
Data Acquisition
70
4.2 Real time routing protocols
A number of real time routing protocols are proposed for WSNs in literature. We can list
key real time routing protocols as follows:
RAP is the first routing protocol (Lu et al., 2002) which addresses real time requirements
using a cross-layer design. In RAP each packet is given a prioritization level called as
requested velocity and this parameter of each packet is determined locally. It is assumed in
protocol, the routing layer is aware of physical geography.
SPEED (He et al., 2003) can be considered as a benchmark real time routing protocol among
others. It affords three types of real-time communication services as real-time unicast, realtime
area-multicast and real-time area-anycast. SPEED bases on a stateless non-deterministic
geographic forwarding routing protocol which enables to find a next hop that is closer to the
destination with its location aware structure.
Another real time routing protocol is MMSPEED (Felemban et al., 2005) which can be stated
as an extension of SPEED. It is designed to provide a timeliness and reliable routing schema
as an approach between the network and the MAC layers. The main difference of
MMSPEED from SPEED is supporting different delivery velocities and levels of reliability.
A real-time power-aware routing (RPAR) protocol (Chipara et al., 2006) is proposed to adapt
the transmission power and routing decision mechanisms dynamically. RPAR differs from
the above protocols via the following features:
• Trade-off between energy consumption and communication delay
• A novel approach to handle lossy links
• Neighborhood management mechanism
Pothuri et al proposes an energy efficient delay-constrained heuristic solution (Pothuri,
2006) which is based on estimating of end-to-end delay. It is to note that the proposed
algorithm is well suitable for small scale WSN applications.
Cheng et al introduce a novel real time routing protocol (Cheng et al., 2006) in which all
path’s end-to-end delay requirements are determined. In the proposed study each sensor
node can decide its forwarding node due to the value of the links requirements. So it is
not necessary to calculate the sum of each link’s delay along the path. Hence the
proposed algorithm differ from with its reduced overhead and simplified route discovery
mechanism.
Directional Geographical Real-Time Routing (DGR) protocol’s goal is to find a solution for
real time video streaming while taking into consideration a number of resource and
performance constraints (Chen et al., 2007). It proposes a novel multipath routing schema
which regards forward error correction (FEC) coding.
Real Time Load Distributed Routing Protocol (RTLD) (Ali et al., 2008) aims link reliability
and packet velocity through one-hop while providing energy efficiency in real time
communication. In RTLD, the forwarding node is determined via optimal values of velocity,
called PRR and the remaining power. It differs from other real time routing protocols with
its feature which utilize the remaining power parameter to select the forwarding candidate
node.
Soyturk and Altilar introduce a novel real time data acquisition approach (Soyturk&Altilar,
2008) which can also be used for rapidly deployable Mission-Critical Wireless Sensor
Networks. It is based on the real-time routing algorithm, namely Stateless Weighted
www.intechopen.com
Real Time Data Acquisition in Wireless Sensor Networks
71
Routing (SWR) algorithm. Data is carried over multiple paths simultaneously to provide
reliability and to provide time limitations. It is a completely stateless routing approach that
nodes do not need any topology knowledge for routing. Algorithm is simple and efficient
which reduces the complexity at nodes and hence provides low-cost architecture.
In the proposed approach the routing tables are not hold in nodes thus they don't know
their neighbors' information. The routing decision is made due to weight values of nodes.
These values are calculated from geographical position and some QoS parameters, as shown
in Equation (1);
weight of node i , wi = locationi + parametersi + parametersnetwork (1)
These weight values of nodes are depend on remaining power or else. This technique
reduces delay, energy consumption and processing requirement. The existing packet header
and QoS fields in SWR are depicted in Fig. 1.
Fig. 1. Simple packet header and its QoS fields (Soyturk&Altilar, 2008)
Basically the SWR works as follows (Soyturk&Altilar, 2006): The source node determines the
weight value of packet and adjusts this value into the packet then broadcast it. When an
intermediate node receives packet, it compares the packet’s weight value and its own
weight value. If its weight value is smaller than the transmitting node’s weight value and
the destination’s weight value (that is 0 for sink), it rebroadcasts the packet, otherwise drops
the packet.
The proposed algorithm (Soyturk & Altilar, 2006):
• provides scalability since neither routing tables nor beaconing is used.
• simplifies the routing process by designing an appropriate algorithm which utilizes a
weight metric.
• decreases calculations, delay, and resource requirements (such as processor and
memory) at nodes since a weight metric is used instead of time consuming operations
on routing tables.
• decreases energy consumption by;
• not beaconing,
• considering the remaining energy levels at nodes,
• limiting the number of relaying nodes.
• provides reliability by exploiting multiple paths and recovering from voids.
• executes routing process completely in the network layer, independent of the MAC
layer underneath.
www.intechopen.com
Data Acquisition
72
The key contribution of SWR is eliminating the communication overhead and energy
consumption produced in topology learning approaches. SWR utilizes resources allowing
data flow over multiple paths rather than prior topology learning and path construction.
Simulations prove that SWR is scalable in both large and mobile networks.
4.3 Comparison of routing protocols in WSN
We compare routing protocols stated above according to basic criteria (1-7) and functional
criteria (8-11) in Table 2. This comparison is based on the issues defined in the chapter. No
additional experiments or simulation is made to evaluate them. We do not include (Chen et
al., 2007) and (Pothuri,2006) to comparison list because the stated criteria of them are not
enough to fill the table and not fully correspond our criteria.
5. Real time data aggregation in WSN
5.1 Delay considerations for real-time data aggregation
In WSN, nodes sense and transmit data to the base station or a sink node. Base station or the
sink node has to perform data collecting in a systematic way while considering constraints
in WSN. Among collected data, there needs to be some correlation and combining processes
in order to achieve high quality information delivery. This can be accomplished by data
aggregation. Data aggregation is defined as “the process of gathering the data from multiple
sensors in order to eliminate redundant transmission and provide united and meaningful information
to the base station” (Rajagopalan & Varshney, 2006). The main goal of data aggregation is to
enhance network lifetime by reducing transmission power consumption in addition to
increase the quality of delivered information.
If we figure out data aggregation in a tree based approach, which is shown in Fig. 2, E
aggregates packets of B and A.
Fig. 2. An example of data aggregation (Heinzelman et al., 2000)
www.intechopen.com
Real Time Data Acquisition in Wireless Sensor Networks
73
No Criteria RAP SPEED
MMSPEED
RPAR RTLD
(Soyturk & Altilar,
2006)
(Cheng et al.,2006)
1.
Control
packet
overhead
Moderate Moderate Low Low Low Low Low
2.
Energy
Consumptio
n
N.M. Moderate N.M. Moderate Low Low Low
3. Reliability N.M. N.M. Moderate N.M. High High N.M.
4.
Algorithm
Complexity
N.M. Moderate High N.M. N.M. Low N.M.
5.
Void
avoidance/
recovery
N.M. Yes Yes Yes N.M. Yes No
6. Scalability
Large Scale
and High
Density
Medium
scale and
high
density
networks
Large
scale and
high
density
networks
Large Scale
Networks
N.M.
Large Scale, High
Density, and
Mission-Critical
N.M.
7.
Node
Discovery
Methodology
Nodes are
aware of
physical
geography
Beacon
exchange
mechanism
Via
periodic
location
update
packets
On-demand
neigborhood
management
Via
invoke
packet
Nodes do not need
to know their
neighbors
Via reply messages
to broadcasting
N.M. : This feature is not mentioned in protocol
Table 2. Comparison of Delay-Constraint Routing Protocols in WSNs
www.intechopen.com
Data Acquisition
74
No Criteria RAP SPEED
MMSPEED
RPAR RTLD
(Soyturk&Altilar,
2006)
(Cheng et al.,2006)
8.
Forwarding
node
selection
criteria
Select
node, has
the
shortest
geographi
c distance
Select node,
meets with
packet delay
requirement
s
Select node
set, meets
with
packet’s
speed level
Select the
most
energyefficient
node,
meets the
packet’s
required
velocity.
Select node
set, meets
with the delay
requirements
and remaining
power
Packet is
broadcasted to
nodes. Nodes that
have the higher
weight value that
packet’s value
rebroadcast.
Due to the value of
the links
requirements
(CED)
9.
Real-time
achiving
methodolog
y
Prioritize
due to
velocity of
packets
Select node,
has the min
delay
parameter
Multiple
packet
delivery
approach
Via
Dynamic
velocity
assignment
policy
Select
appropriate
node due to
end-to-end
delay with the
best PRR
value and
remaining
power
Via packet
classification due to
QoS metrics
Via constructed
Equivalent Delay
Concept
10.
Energy
Consumptio
n Reducing
Strategy
N.M.
Via stateless
nondeterministi
c geographic
forwarding
N.M.
Adapts
variable
transmissio
n power.
Adapting
transceiver
states
Via threshold field
and nodes don’t
consume energy to
discover its
neighbors
Reduced route
discovery process.
11.
Location
Awareness
Strategy
Via GPS
or other
location
services
Via beacon
packets
Via GPS or
other
location
services
Via GPS or
other
location
services
Via predetermined
neighbor
nodes
Via GPS or other
location services
N.M.
N.M. : This feature is not mentioned in protocol
Table 2. Comparison of Delay-Constraint Routing Protocols in WSNs (continued).
www.intechopen.com
Real Time Data Acquisition in Wireless Sensor Networks
75
In (Krishnamachari et al., 2002) two methods of data aggregation are defined: optimal
aggregation and suboptimal aggregation. In optimal aggregation, all the sources send a
single packet to the same receiver through an aggregation tree. In the suboptimal
aggregation, sources send packets to different destinations which are determined by
distance or greedy approaches.
The design of data aggregation schema affects delay parameters. For example, if sensor
nodes whose packets will be aggregated are in different distances to the sink node, the
receiving times of packets to the sink node may vary. In Fig. 3, A is the aggregator node. If E
and B transmit simultaneously, the arriving times of E’s packet and B’s packet will be
different. It is to note that the aggregation process in an aggregator node increases delay
(Krishnamachari et al., 2002).
According to these considerations, trade-off between delay and energy consumption
become an important issue while designing an aggregation schema. Also, the delay
tolerance of the application is an important factor, affects the optimality of the data
aggregation method (Zhu et al., 2005). So delay boundaries must be determined for
achieving maximum energy efficient structure (Zhu et al., 2005).
There exists such data aggregation methods, focus on energy efficiency, network lifetime
and data accuracy in literature. In the following subsection we present the basic
functionality of the delay constraint data aggregation algorithms due to their introduced
features.
Fig. 3. Distance and delay interaction (Krishnamachari et al., 2002)
5.2 Delay constraint data aggregation algorithms
In literature, a number of data aggregation methods are proposed which address latency,
reliability and energy consumption issues. In this section we mention data aggregation
methods whose features meet real time requirements while considering other issues.
We start with Upadhyayula et al’s (2003) study which proposes a CDMA/TDMA based
algorithm that constructs a tree and schedules its nodes for collision-free transmission. The
aim of the proposed study is to establish a network which requires fast and reliable data
aggregation by considering energy efficiency.
In the proposed study the increase of parallel data transmissions reduce the latency. Hence
required delay boundaries are achieved via constructed balanced tree.
www.intechopen.com
Data Acquisition
76
Yu et al. (2006) proposed a delay-constraint data aggregation schema which addresses
packet scheduling in a general tree structure while considering a real time latency
constraint.
Yu et al. (2006) indicate that “the transmission energy does not monotonically decrease as
the transmission time increases – the transmission energy may increase when the
transmission time exceeds some threshold value” Also a model is introduced which
describes the tradeoff between energy and latency. The energy-latency trade-off function
w(?) is described as follows (Yu et al., 2006):
( ) [ (2 1) ]
s
w? = C · ? ·R - + F ·? · R (2)
Also the energy-latency function curve for long range and short range communication is
figured as follows:
Fig. 4. Energy-latency function curve (Yu et al., 2006)
Cheng et al. (2006) propose a heuristic algorithm for real-time data aggregation. The authors
consider two constraints such as node degree bounded, where the maximum node degree
shall not exceed a bound; and tree height bounded, where the tree height shall not exceed a
bound. In the proposed study it is stated that the maximum node degree of the Minimum
Spanning Tree in the plane is six which can be reduced to five. Also Cheng et al., (2006)
propose three heuristic algorithms to minimize total energy cost under the latency
constraint. These algorithms are node first heuristic, tree first heuristic and hop bounded
heuristic. More details about these algorithms are stated in Cheng et al. (2006).
Akkaya et al. (2005) propose an efficient aggregation method for delay-constrained data.
The proposed study investigates the problem of efficient in-network data aggregation of
delay-constrained traffic in wireless sensor networks. Authors consider both real time and
non-real time data while designing the proposed method. Real-time data are generated and
relayed to the gateway in response to delay-sensitive queries.
There is a real time queue at each relay node for the incoming packets of these multiple
flows which is described in Fig.5 (Akkaya et al., 2005). The purpose of having a different
queue is to enhance storage capacity of a sensor node and to generate real time flows
depending on the number of active real time source sensors.
www.intechopen.com
Real Time Data Acquisition in Wireless Sensor Networks
77
Fig. 5. Queuing model on sensors (Akkaya & Younis, 2004)
We have compared the delay-constraint data aggregation methods, stated above according
to tree construction and energy-latency trade-off approaches.
A comparasion of these techniques are depicted in Table 3.
Data Gathering Tree
Construction
How manage energy-latency trade-off
(Upadhyayula
et al., 2003)
Propose a CDMA/TDMA
based algorithm which adds
new nodes to the least weight
branch.
Constructing a balanced tree.
Establishing parent-child relationship
with other nodes.
(Yu et al., 2006) -
Rate adaptation techniques and nonmonotonic
energy model.
(Cheng et al.,
2006)
Construct a degree bounded
and height bounded tree via
proposed algorithms
Use in order to obtain a Establish a
spanning tree by heuristic algorithms.
In the tree all nodes are no more than H
hops away from the root.
(Akkaya et al.,
2005)
It uses the Shortest Path Tree
heuristic in order to build an
initial aggregation tree.
A Weighted Fair Queuing based
mechanism for packet scheduling is
employed at each node.
Table 3. Real time latency data aggregation methodology
6. Real-time WSN applications
Applying the developed RT WSN methods over real-world applications shows their quality,
applicability, and good or bad sides. Also, discussing such applications enables people to
understand the structure of the methods more clearly. We examine design issues of Real
Time WSN first, and then present some of the latest RT-WSN applications in industrial and
academic field. In previous studies, researchers have classified WSN applications according
to usage areas such as medical, military or community-related but it will be more useful to
classify them according to their functionalities. We group applications as following:
• Surveillance applications
• Status monitoring
• Localization
www.intechopen.com
Data Acquisition
78
• Motion monitoring
Design issues differ for each of these areas; however, real time parameters are the key issues
for each group of applications. Real time requirements must be maintained while providing
other requirements such as energy consumption and accuracy. Providing real time
guarantee is conducted by using some predetermined deadline times, being probabilistic or
deterministic. Deadline times must be short enough that the reaction taken by the system
will be efficient. In most applications we examined, deadline times are divided into
subdeadlines for each subprocess. We make a general list of subprocesses having
subdeadlines:
• Initial Activation
• Sensing
• Wake-up
• Media Access
• Transmission
• Routing
• Aggregation
• Base Process
Most of these subprocesses exist in large scale networks, but small scale networks may not
have all of them.
In these applications sensors may be mobile or fixed, and make a wireless communication
with each other via single-hop or multi-hop. Sensors close to each other form a group, where
each group communicates with other groups or base station by its cluster head. The base
station is a device which coordinates the groups, compiles the data sent from them, and it
has more enhanced resources compared to the nodes. The communication between the base
station and cluster heads is generally single-hop, however in some applications it may be
multi-hop. The base station relays the meaningful data it gathered to a main server or an
end user via some media such as wired, satellite, 802.11 WLAN links.
There are numerous real time applications using WSNs. In this section, in order to support
the real time issues stated previously, we limit our application examples in two. One sample
application is a large scale network and the other is relatively small scale one that are both
examples of latest Real-Time WSNs.
6.1 Sample application: Vigilnet - real time target tracking with WSN
The developed application in (He et al., 2006) detects fast moving targets in real time while
considering energy consumption and accuracy. The system design is implemented due to
the pre-determined latency boundaries. It is stated that for environment surveillance the rate
of event occurrence is low, so the sensor nodes wait in idle state most of their lifetime. The
sentry nodes wake up other nodes in the presence of critical events. If a target enters the
area nodes in idle state are waken up and start to monitor and sample. All the sensors
transit their data to a group leader which is responsible for aggregation, periodically. After
the aggregation process group leaders report the event to the nearest base. It is to note that
the communications between group members and group leader is one-hop, so the
capabilities of group members are equal. After receiving event information to the base
station, data is correlated by logical methods. The authors state some challenges while
designing such a network. These design challenges are:
www.intechopen.com
Real Time Data Acquisition in Wireless Sensor Networks
79
- Selection of sentry nodes and determining its duty cycle according to probability of event
occurrence. This issue affects the coverage ratio of the whole area.
- Minimizing the actuation delay. The sufficient timeliness must be achieved in order to
detect fast targets.
- Designing fast detection algorithms. It is to note that detection is a discrete event. The total
data in these events must be met with a threshold value in order to decide an
occurrence as an event. If detection delay is reduced, the detection confidence will
increase simultaneously.
- Designing effective wake-up services. Nodes in 1% are awake and 99% are in idle state. If
any transmission is received from sentry nodes in this tiny wake-up period, non-sentry
nodes activate and start to monitor. If the tiny wake-up periods become longer, the
activation time of node becomes minimal but energy consumption is increased.
- Determining the degree of aggregation (DOA). As mentioned before, more aggregation
process increases the level of accuracy but introduces additional energy consumption.
- Classification of information: In order to achieve a meaningful data, it is necessary to
collect these data from many sources. For example, to determine a car's speed, the
number of sources reporting must be at least 3. However collecting information from
many sources causes some delay.
As a summary, (He et al., 2006) presents a complex real time sensing network design, where
timeliness is guaranteed by sub-deadlines. This can be considered as a good example that
figures out the trade-offs in design processes.
6.2 Sample application: real-time monitoring of hurricane winds with WSN
This application proposed in (Otero et al., 2009) is deployed in relatively medium scale. It
remotely monitors the effects of hurricane winds on man-made structures like house or a
factory (Otero et al., 2009) using wireless sensor network. The system architecture is
illustrated in Fig. 6.
Fig. 6. System Architecture (Otero et al., 2009)
www.intechopen.com
Data Acquisition
80
In (Otero et al., 2009), the real time requirements are not mentioned in numerical limits like
in (He et al., 2006), but stated as 'near-real time'. In order to increase the communication
performance between monitored house and remote laptop, the sampling node and
transmission efficiency are considered as (Otero et al., 2009):
- Sampling rate must be at least 10 samples/second for pressure measurements.
- Nodes must transmit at least 5 MB of collected data to the remote site in every 5
minutes interval.
As mentioned above a time driven reporting schema is used. Basically system works as
follows:
Data, collected by sensor nodes, are transmitted to a base station. This transmission is hold
in one-hop and all the sensors have similar capabilities. Also the transmission of remote
sensor nodes is managed by base station. A scheduling algorithm is used to assign internal
transmission slots to remote sensor nodes (Otero et al., 2009). Nodes can only transmit their
data in their active slots.
The key design issues stated in (Otero et al., 2009) are:
- Determining appropriate timing mechanisms between sensor nodes.
- Determining number of sensor nodes. It is to note that the density of nodes affects the
timing problem.
- Developing or selecting appropriate compression algorithms. In this application, data is
zipped rather than aggregated.
As a conclusion, this application uses a single-hop transmission, where due to the small
deployment area and less number of nodes, zipping is used instead of aggregation in order
to establish a simple architecture.
7. Conclusion
Data required for applications can be provided in several ways and with different methods.
These methods constitute the data acquisition phase of these applications. Real-time data
acquisition differs from usual data acquisition due to goals behind it and applied provision
methods. While the usual (non-real time) data is used to make strategic level decisions, realtime
data supports to make tactical decisions. Consumer of the real-time data, hence, should
be supplied in a timely manner to fulfill consumer requirements. Time interval for real-time
may change with respect to application needs either in terms of microseconds, milliseconds,
seconds, or minutes. It should be fast enough to preserve the essential information
associated with the event. Real time data is then processed immediately in order to make a
decision or to make a reaction.
In this chapter, we overview real-time data acquisition in Wireless Sensor Networks. We
present the approaches proposed in the literature and their primary positive and negative
aspects. As described in the chapter, real-time data acquisition involves operations on
multiple layers in the communication architecture. It becomes a complex task to manage in
such a wireless communication network. Constraints and features peculiar to sensor
networks harden the problem. We underline the key points and aspects in such a multitasking
environment and present related studies in the literature.
While the medium access is mandatory issue that must be solved locally in real-time, endto-
end communication requirements drive the limits and shape the approaches to become
efficient and applicable in WSN. We present the performance issues and factoring
parameters for real-time data acquisition in WSN. Of the approaches that aim to solve one
www.intechopen.com
Real Time Data Acquisition in Wireless Sensor Networks
81
communication task, e.g. medium access or routing, we also present comparisons of them.
These comparisons provide a snapshot view of the protocols and derive conclusions on how
new approaches should be. Of the routing protocols, Stateless Weighted Routing (SWR) is
one key protocol that aims to solve multiple objectives and problem in WSN. With respect to
other protocols, SWR is the easiest and the simplest one to implement. It has many
advantages and is superlative compared to other similar protocols.
While aggregation approaches are needed to reduce communication overhead, to provide
efficient bandwidth usage, and to provide higher quality data, these approaches introduce
delay. Moreover, aggregation is a complex task to be handled in identical tiny sensor nodes.
Aggregation at more powerful nodes (with additional ability and higher resources) is more
attractive solution.
There are applications that use real-time data aggregation via Wireless Sensor Networks.
Of these, we present two and give design strategies of them. By increased demand on
sensor applications, applications that use real-time data aggregation via WSN will increase
in near future.
8. References
Akkaya K. and M. Younis, (2004) "Energy-aware routing of time-constrained traffic in
wireless sensor networks," in the International Journal of Communication Systems,
Special Issue on Service Differentiation and QoS in Ad Hoc Networks, 2004
Akkaya K., M. Younis, and M. Youssef, (2005) “Efficient aggregation for delay-constrained
data in wireless sensor networks”, The Proceedings of Internet Compatible QoS in Ad
Hoc Wireless Networks, 2005.
Akyildiz I. F., W. Su , Y. Sankarasubramaniam , E. Cayirci, (2002) “Wireless sensor
networks: a survey”, Computer Networks: The International Journal of Computer and
Telecommunications Networking, v.38 n.4, p.393-422, 15 March 2002
Ali A., LA Latiff, MA Sarijari, N. Fisal,” (2008) Real- time Routing in Wireless Sensor
Networks”, The 28th International Conference on Distributed Computing Systems
Workshops, 2008, pp 114- 119.
Al-Karaki JN, AE Kamal, (2004) “Routing techniques in wireless sensor networks: a survey”,
IEEE Wireless Communications, 2008
Annamalai V., S. K. Gupta and L. Schwiebert. (2003) On Tree-Based Convergecasting in
Wireless Sensor Networks. IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Conference
2003, New Orleans.
Bacco, G.D., T. Melodia and F. Cuomo, (2004) “A MAC protocol for delay-bounded
applications in wireless sensor networks” Proc. Med-Hoc-Net. pp. 208-220.
Caccamo, M., L.Y. Zhang, L. Sha and G. Buttazzo, (2002) “An implicit prioritized access
protocol for wireless sensor networks”, Proc. 23rd IEEE RTSS. pp. 39-48.
Chen M, Leung VCM,Mao S, Yuan Y. (2007) Directional geographical routing for real-time
video communications in wireless sensor networks. Elsevier Computer
Communications 2007.
Cheng H, Q Liu, X Jia (2006) “Heuristic Algorithms for Real-time Data Aggregation in
Wireless Sensor Networks”, IWCMC’06, July 3–6, 2006, Vancouver, British
Columbia, Canada.
www.intechopen.com
Data Acquisition
82
Cheng W, L Yuan, Z Yang, X Du, (2006), “A Real-time Routing Protocol with Constrained
Equivalent Delay in Sensor Networks”, Proceedings of the 11th IEEE Symposium on
Computers and Communications (ISCC'06)
Chenyang Lu , Brian M. Blum , Tarek F. Abdelzaher , John A. Stankovic , Tian He, (2002)
RAP: A Real-Time Communication Architecture for Large-Scale Wireless Sensor
Networks, Proceedings of the Eighth IEEE Real-Time and Embedded Technology and
Applications Symposium (RTAS'02), p.55, September 25-27, 2002
Chipara O., Z. He, G. Xing, Q. Chen, X. Wang, C. Lu, J. Stankovic, and T. Abdelzaher. (2006)
Real-time Power Aware Routing in Wireless Sensor Networks. In IWQOS, June
2006
Chipcon. CC2420 low power radio transceiver, http://www.chipcon.com.
Chlamtac I. and S. Kutten. (1987) Tree-based Broadcasting in Multihop Radio Networks.
IEEE Transactions on Computers Vol. C-36, No. 10, Oct 1987.
Demirkol I, C Ersoy, F Alagoz, “MAC protocols for wireless sensor networks: a survey”,
(2006) IEEE Communications Magazine.
Du H. X. Hu, X. Jia, “Energy Efficient Routing And Scheduling For Real-Time Data
Aggregation In WSNs”, Computer Communications, vol.29 (2006) 3527–3535
Felemban E., C.-G. Lee, E. Ekici, R. Boder, and S. Vural, (2005) "Probabilistic QoS Guarantee
in Reliability and Timeliness Domains in Wireless Sensor Networks," in Proceedings
of IEEE INFOCOM 2005, Miami, FL, USA.
Ergen, S.C. and P. Varaiya (2006). PEDAMACS: power efficient and delay aware medium
access protocol for sensor networks. IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput. 5(7), 920-930.
Francomme, J., G. Mercier and T. Val (2006).A simple method for guaranteed deadline of
periodic messages in 802.15.4 cluster cells for control automation applications. In:
Proc.IEEE ETFA. pp. 270-277.
He T., J. Stankovic, C. Lu, T. Abdelzaher, (2003) SPEED: A real-time routing protocol for
sensor networks, in: Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. on Distributed Computing Systems (ICDCS),
Rhode Island, USA, May 2003, pp. 46–55.
He T., P. A. Vicaire, T. Yan, L. Luo, L. Gu, G. Zhou, R. Stoleru, Q. Cao, J. A. Stankovic, and T.
Abdelzaher, (2006) “Achieving real-time target tracking using wireless sensor
networks.” in RTAS’06.
He, T., L. Gu, L. Luo, T. Yan, J. Stankovic, T. Abdelzaher and S. Son (2006b). An overview of
data aggregation architecture for real-time tracking with sensor networks. In: Proc.
IEEE RTAS. pp. 55-66.
Heinzelman W., A. Chandrakasan, and H. Balakrishnan, (2000), “Energy -Efficient
Communication Protocol for Wireless Microsensor Networks,” In Proceedings of the
Hawaii Conference on System Sciences, Jan. 2000.
Heinzelman W., A. Chandrakasan, and H. Balakrishnan, (2000), Energy-Efficient
Communication Protocol for Wireless Sensor Networks, Proceeding of the Hawaii
International Conference System Sciences, Hawaii, USA, January 2000.
Hu Y, N Yu, X Jia, (2006) “Energy efficient real-time data aggregation in wireless sensor
networks ” IWCMC’06, July 3–6, 2006, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
IEEE Std 802.15.4 (2006). Part 15.4: Wireless medium access (MAC) and physical layer (PHY)
specifications for low-rate wireless personal area networks (WPANs). IEEE-SA.
www.intechopen.com
Real Time Data Acquisition in Wireless Sensor Networks
83
Jamieson K., H. Balakrishnan, and Y. C. Tay, (2003) “Sift: A MAC Protocol for Event-Driven
Wireless Sensor Networks,” MIT Laboratory for Computer Science, Tech. Rep. 894,
May 2003
Kim T.H. and S. Choi (2006). Priority-based delay mitigation for event-monitoring IEEE
802.15.4 LR-WPANs. IEEE Commun. Letters 10(3), 213-215.
Koubaa A., M. Alves, B. Nefzi and Y. Q. Song (2006). Improving the IEEE 802.15.4 slotted
CSMA/CA MAC for time-critical events in wireless sensor networks. In: Proc.
Workshop Real-Time Networks. pp. 270-277.
Krishnamachari L, D Estrin, S Wicker, (2002), “Impact of Data Aggregation in Wireless
Sensor Networks”, Distributed Computing Systems Workshops, 2002
Langendoen K, Medium access control in wireless sensor networks. In H. Wu and Y. Pan,
editors, (2007) Medium Access Control in Wireless Networks, Volume II: Practice and
Standards. Nova Science Publishers, Inc.
Li, Y.J.; Chen, C.S.; Song, Y.-Q.; Wang, Z. (2007) Real-time QoS support in wireless sensor
networks: a survey. In Proc of 7th IFAC Int Conf on Fieldbuses & Networks in Industrial
& Embedded Systems (FeT'07), Toulouse, France.
Lin P., C. Qiao, and X. Wang, (2004) “Medium access control with a dynamic duty cycle for
sensor networks”, IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Conference,
Volume: 3, Pages: 1534 - 1539, 21-25 March 2004.
Lu C., G. Xing, O. Chipara, C.-L. Fok, and S. Bhattacharya, (2005) “A spatiotemporal query
service for mobile users in sensor networks,” in ICDCS ’05.
Lu C., B.M. Blum, T.F. Abdelzaher, J.A. Stankovic and T. He (2002). RAP: a real-time
communication architecture for large-scale wireless sensor networks. In: Proc. IEEE
RTAS. pp. 55-66.
Lu G., B. Krishnamachari and C.S. Raghavendra, (2004) “An adaptive energy-efficient and
low-latency MAC for data gathering in wireless sensor networks” Proc. Int. Parallel
Distrib. Process. Symp. pp. 224-231.
Monaco U., et.al. “Understanding Optimal Data Gathering In the Energy and Latency
Domains of A Wireless Sensor Network”, Computer Networks, vol. 50 (2006) 3564–
3584
Otero Carlos E., Antonio Velazquez, Ivica Kostanic, Chelakara Subramanian, Jean-Paul
Pinelli,(2009) "Real-Time Monitoring of Hurricane Winds using Wireless and
Sensor Technology", Journ. of Comp
Raghunathan V., C. Schurgers, S. Park, and M. B. Srivastava, (2002) “Energyaware wireless
microsensor networks,” IEEE Signal Processing Mag., vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 40–50, Mar.
2002.
Rajagopalan R, PK Varshney, (2006) “Data aggregation techniques in sensor networks: A
survey”, IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, 2006
Rhee I., A. Warrier, M. Aia and J. Min, (2005) “Z-MAC: a hybrid MAC for wireless sensor
networks”. Proc. ACM Sensys. pp. 90-101.
Ruzzelli A.G., G.M.P. O'Hare, M.J. O'Grady and R. Tynan (2006). MERLIN: a synergetic
integration of MAC and routing protocol for distributed sensor networks. In: Proc.
IEEE SECON. pp. 266-275.
Soyturk M., D.T. Altilar, (2008) Reliable Real-Time Data Acquisition for Rapidly Deployable
Mission-Critical Wireless Sensor Networks, IEEE INFOCOM 2008.
www.intechopen.com
Data Acquisition
84
Soyturk M., T.Altilar. (2006) “Source-Initiated Geographical Data Flow for Wireless Ad Hoc
and Sensor Networks”, IEEE WAMICON’06
Upadhyayula S, V Annamalai, SKS Gupta (2003) “A low-latency and energy-efficient
algorithm for convergecast in wireless sensor networks ”- IEEE GLOBECOM 2003
Watteyne T., I. Auge-Blum and S. Ubeda, (2006) “Dual-mode real-time MAC protocol for
wireless sensor networks: a validation/simulation approach”, Proc. InterSen.
Wu J., P. Havinga, S. Dulman and T. Nieberg (2004). Eyes source routing protocol for
wireless sensor networks. In: Proc. EWSN.
Ye Wei, John Heidemann, Deborah Estrin (2001) “An Energy-Efficient MAC protocol for
Wireless Sensor Networks”, USC/ISITECHNICAL REPORT ISI-TR-543,
SEPTEMBER 2001.
Yu Y, VK Prasanna, B Krishnamachari, (2006), “Energy minimization for real-time data
gathering in wireless sensor networks” IEEE Transactions on Wireless
Communications, Vol. 5, No. 11, November 2006
Yuan L., W. Cheng, X. Du. “An Energy-Efficient Real-Time Routing Protocol For Sensor
Networks”, Computer Communications, vol.30 (2007) 2274–2283
Zhu Y., K. Sundaresan, and R. Sivakumar.(2005) Practical limits on achievable energy
improvements and useable delay tolerance in correlation aware data gathering in
wireless sensor networks. In Proc. of SECON, 2005
www.intechopen.com
Data Acquisition
Edited by Michele Vadursi
ISBN 978-953-307-193-0
Hard cover, 344 pages
Publisher Sciyo
Published online 28, September, 2010
Published in print edition September, 2010
InTech Europe
University Campus STeP Ri
Slavka Krautzeka 83/A
51000 Rijeka, Croatia
Phone: +385 (51) 770 447
Fax: +385 (51) 686 166
www.intechopen.com
InTech China
Unit 405, Office Block, Hotel Equatorial Shanghai
No.65, Yan An Road (West), Shanghai, 200040, China
Phone: +86-21-62489820
Fax: +86-21-62489821
The book is intended to be a collection of contributions providing a birdâ€™s eye view of some relevant
multidisciplinary applications of data acquisition. While assuming that the reader is familiar with the basics of
sampling theory and analog-to-digital conversion, the attention is focused on applied research and industrial
applications of data acquisition. Even in the few cases when theoretical issues are investigated, the goal is
making the theory comprehensible to a wide, application- oriented, audience.
How to reference
In order to correctly reference this scholarly work, feel free to copy and paste the following:
Mujdat Soyturk, Halil Cicibas and Omer Unal (2010). Real-Time Data Acquisition in Wireless Sensor Networks,
Data Acquisition, Michele Vadursi (Ed.), ISBN: 978-953-307-193-0, InTech, Available from:
http://www.intechopen.com/books/data-acquisition/real-time-data-acquisition-in-wireless-sensor-networks
